      Lectures on Alchemy 



Terence McKenna 



Lecture 1 

Well, it is a small group and this was my intent by focussing on the Hermetic Corpus and alchemy. 2 Fvejust 
gotten tired of talking about psychedelic drugs and always saying the same things over and over again, 
nevertheless it's a challenge to go outside my own bailiwick. 3 1 mean I've had an interest in hermeticism and 
alchemy since I was about 14 and read Jung's psychology and (of alchemy and it opened for me the fact of 
the existence of this vast literature, a literature that is very little read or understood in the modern context. 
The Jungians have made much of it, but to their own purposes and perhaps not always with complete 
fidelity to the intent of the tradition. We'll talk a lot about the Jungian approach but there are other- 
approaches even within the 20"' century. 

I believe, since I don't have the catalog I'm not absolutely certain, but I believe the catalog urged you to 
read Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition by Dame Frances Yates and this is, though Frances Yates 
scholarship is very controversial, I think that to get an overview of the landscape her book is probably the 
best single book between covers. It's not pleasing to some factions and we can talk about that, I mean, we 
will probably discover within the group all strains of alchemical illusions and delusions that have always 
driven this particular engine, but I thought to get one book that sort of covered the territory that was a good 
one to start with. Well then I found out that it's very hard to get this book. I didn't realize that because it's 
been sitting on my shelf for years. Richard Bird found a reprint at the Bodhi Tree. I wasn't aware of this 
particular edition so, though probably none of you brought it with you in heavily underlined form, if after 
this weekend you want to try and get it, it is available and if you can't get that edition, why, a good book 
service can probably come up with the first edition which is Routledge Kegan Paul. 

I wouldn't hold a weekend like this simply to go over a body of ancient literature if I didn't think it had some 
efficacy or import for the modern dilemma and some of you may know the song by the Grateful Dead in 
which the refrain is "I need a miracle every day. " I think any reasonable person can conclude that the 
redemption of the world, if it's to be achieved, can only be achieved through magic. It's too late for science. 
It's too late for hortatory politics. 

Well, it's very interesting - every ancient literature has its apocalypses and in the hermetic literature there is 
a prophecy, I think it's in book two but that really doesn't matter, and the prophecy is that a day will come 
when men no longer care for the earth and at that day the gods will depart and everything will be thrown 
into primal chaos and this prophecy was very strongly in the minds of the strains of non-Christian thought 
that evolved at the close - at the centuries of closure - of the Roman Empire. When you look back into 
historical time it's when you reach the first and second centuries after Christ that you reach a world whose 
psychology was very much like the psychology of our own time. It was a psychology of despair and 
exhaustion. 



' hit p:li 'www. well.com/user/daridu/lmalchemv. html 

- Corpus Hermeticum, Marsilio Ficino's Latin translation in fourteen tracts, of which eight early printed editions 

appeared before 1500 and a further twenty-two by 1641. [2] This collection, which includes the Pwmandres and some 
addresses of Hermes to disciples Tat, Ammon and Asclepius. was said to hare originated in the school of Ammonius 
Saccas and to hare passed through the keeping of Michael Psellus: it is preserved in fourteenth century manuscripts. [3] 
The, last three tracts in modern editions were translated independently from another manuscript by Ficino's 
contemporary Lodorico Lazzaretti (1447-1500) and first printed in 1507. Extensive quotes of similar material are 
found in classical authors such as Joannes Stobaeus. Parts of the Hermetica appeared in the 4th-century Gnostic 
library found in Nag Hammadi. Other works in Syriac. Arabic. Armenian, Coptic and other languages may also be 
termed ''Hermetica'' - another famous tract is the Emerald Tablet, which teaches the doctrine "o,s above, so below". 

3 A bailiwick is usually the area of jurisdiction of a bailiff, and may also apply to a territory in which the sheriffs 
functions were exercised by a privately appointed bailiff under a royal or imperial writ. The word is now more 
generally used in a metaphorical sense, to indicate a sphere of authority, experience, activity, study or interest, 
see Wikipedia. 



1 of 34 



pages 



This is because Greek science which had evolved under the aegis of Democritian atomism 4 and Platonic 
metaphysics 5 had essentially come to a dead end in those centuries. We can debate the reasons why this 
happened. An obvious suggestion would be that they failed to develop an experimental method and so 
everything just dissolved into competing schools of philosophical speculation and a profound pessimism 
spread through the Hellenistic world and out of that pessimism and in the context of that kind of universal 
despair which attends the dissolution of great empires a literature was created from the first to the fourth 
centuries after Christ which we call the Hermetic Corpus or in some cases the Trismegistic Hymns. 

Now this body of literature was misunderstood by later centuries, especially the Renaissance, because it was 
taken at face value and assumed to be at least contemporary with Moses if not much older. So the 
Renaissance view of Hermeticism was based on a tragic misunderstanding of the true antiquity of this 
material and there are people, hopefully none in this room, who still would have us believe that this 
literature antedates the Mosaic Law, that it is as old as Dynastic Egypt. But this is an indefensible position 
from my point of view. In the early 16"' century two men, a father and son, Issac and Merle Casaubon, 6 
showed through the new science of philology, that this material was in fact late Hellenistic. 

Now, I've always said that I am not a Classicist in the Viconian sense, in the sense that there is a certain 
strain of thought that always wants to believe that the oldest stuff is the. best stuff. This is not the case to my 
mind. To my mind what is amazing is how recent everything is. So I have no sympathy with the fans of lost 
Atlantis or any of that kind of malarky because to me what is amazing is how it all is less than 10,000 years 
old. Anything older than 10,000 years puts us into the realm of an aceramic society relying on chipped flint 
for it's primary technology. 

What the Hermetic Corpus is is the most poetic and cleanly expressed outpouring of ancient knowledge that 
we possess. But it was reworked in the hands of these late Hellenistic peoples and it is essentially a religion 
of the redemption of the earth through magic. It has great debt to a tradition called Sevillian which means 
to mean Mandeanism, and Mandeanism was a kind of proto-Hellenistic gnosis that laid great stress on the 
power of life, Zoa, Bios, and in that sense it has a tremendously contemporary ring to it. 

We also are living in the twilight of a great empire, and I don't particularly mean the American empire, I 
mean the empire of European thinking created in the. wake of the. Protestant Reformation and the rise of 
modern industrialism, the empire, in short of science. Science has exhausted itself and become mere techne. 7 
It's still able to perform its magical tricks, but it has no claim on a metaphysic with any meaning because 
the program of rational understanding that was pursued by science has pushed so deeply into the 
phenomenon of nature that the. internal contradictions of the method are now exposed for all to see. 

In discussing alchemy especially we will meet with the concept of the Coincidentia oppositorum - the union 
of opposites. This is an idea that is completely alien to science. It's the idea that nothing can be understood 
unless it is simultaneously viewed as both being what it is and what it is not and in alchemical symbolism 
we will meet again and again symbolical expression of the Coincidentia oppositorum. It may be in the form 
of a hermaphrodite, it may be in the form of the union of Sol and Luna, it may be in the form of the union of 
mercury with lead, or with sulphur, in other words alchemical thinking is thinking that is always 
antithetical, always holds the possibility of ... by a mere shift of perspective its opposite premise will gain 
power and come, into focus. 



4 Democritus (c. 460-370 be), Greek philosopher. He developed the atomic theory originated by his teacher Leucippus 

that explained natural phenomena in terms of the arrangement and rearrangement of atoms moving in a void. 

5 Plato (c. 429- c. 347 be), Greek philosopher. A disciple of Socrates and the teacher of Aristotle, he founded the Academy 

in Athens. His theory of "ideas'' or "forms'" contrasts abstract entities or universals with their objects or particulars in 
the material world. His philosophical writings are presented in the form of dialogues, and his political theories appear 
in the Republic. 

6 Isaac Casaubon (18 February 1559, Genera - 1 July 1614, London) was a classical scholar and philologist, first in 

France and then later in England, regarded by many of his time as the most learned in Europe. 
(Florence Estienne) Merle Casaubon (14 August 1599 - 14 July 1671), son of Isaac Casaubon, was a French-English 
classical scholar. Although biographical dictionaries (including the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica) commonly 
accentuate his name to Merle, he himself did not do so. 

7 Techne, or techne, as distinguished from episteme, is etymologically derived from the Greek word TEXvrj (Ancient 

Greek: [tek nSl], Modern Greek: ['texnij, which is often translated as craftsmanship, craft, or art. It is the rational 
method involved in producing an object or accomplishing a goat or objective. Techne resembles episteme in the 
implication of knowledge of principles, although techne differs in that its intent is making or doing, as opposed to 
"disinterested understanding. " see Wikipedia 



2 of 34 



pages 



/ think it was John, when we went around the circle, who mentioned his interest in shamanism. There's a 
wonderful book called The, Forge, and the. Crucible by Mircea Eliade in which he shows that the shaman is 
the brother of the, smith, the smith is the metallurgist, the worker in metals, and this is where alchemy has 
its roots. In a sense, alchemy is older than the Trismegistus Corpus and then it is also given a new lease on 
life by the, philosophical underpinings which the. Corpus Hermeticum provides it. 

Alchemy, the word alchemy, can be traced back to mean Egypt or a blackening and in its earliest strata it 
probably refers to techniques referring to dying, meaning the, coloring of cloth, and gilding of metals, and 
the forging and working of metal. I mean, we who take, this for granted have no idea how mysterious and 
powerful this seemed to ancient people and in fact it would seem so to us if we, had anything to do with it. I 
mean how many of us are welders or casters of metal. It's a magical process to take for instance cinnabar, a 
red, soft ore and by the mere act of heating it in a furnace it will sweat liquid mercury onto its surface. Well, 
we have unconsciously imbibed the ontology of science where we, have mind firmly separated out from the 
world. We. take, this for granted, it's effortless, because it's the ambience of the civilization we've been born 
into but in an earlier age, and some writers would say a more naive age, but I wonder about that, but in an 
earlier age mind and matter were seen to be alloyed together throughout nature, so that the, sweating of 
mercury out ofcinnibar is not a material process, it's a process in which the mind and the observations of 
the metalworker maintain an important role, and let's talk for a moment about mercury because the spirit 
Mercurius is almost the patron deity of alchemy. 

You all know what mercury looks like. At room temperature it's a silvery liquid that flows, it's like a mirror. 
For the alchemists, and this is just a very short exercise in alchemical thinking, for the alchemists mercury 
was mind itself, in a sense, and by tracing through the steps by which they reached that conclusion you can 
have a taste of what alchemical thinking was about, mercury takes the form of its container. If I pour 
mercury into a cup, it takes the shape of the cup, if I pour it into a test tube, it takes the shape of the test 
tube. This taking the shape of its container is a quality of mind and yet here it is present in a flowing, silvery 
metal. 

The other thing is, mercury is a reflecting surface. You never see mercury, what you see is the world which 
surrounds it, which is perfectly reflected in its surface like a moving mirror, you see. And then if you've ever, 
as a child, I mean I have no idea how toxic this process is, but I spent a lot of time as a child hounding my 
grandfather for his hearing aid batteries which I would then smash with a hammer and get the mercury out 
and collect it in little, bottles and carry it around with me. Well, the wonderful thing about mercury is when 
you pour it out on a surface and it beads up, then each bead of mercury becomes a little microcosm of the 
world. And yet the mercury flows back together into a unity. Well, as a child I had not yet imbibed the, 
assumptions and the ontology of science. I was functioning as an alchemist. For me, mercury was this 
fascinating magical substance, onto which I could project the contents of my mind. And a child playing with 
mercury is an alchemist hard at work, no doubt about it. 

Well, so then, this is a phenomenon in the physical world and then mind is a phenomenon in the, Cartesian 
distinction, which is between the. Res Extensa and the Res Verins." This is the great splitting of the world 
into two parts. I remember Al Wong once said to me, we were talking about the yin yang symbol, and he said 
you know the interesting thing is not the yin or the yang, the interesting thing is the s shaped surface that 
runs between them. And that s shaped surface is a river of alchemical mercury. Now, where the alchemists 
saw this river of alchemical mercury is in the boundary between waking and sleeping. There is a place, not 
quite sleeping, not quite waking, and there there flows this river of alchemical mercury where you can 
project the contents of the unconscious and you can read it back to yourself. This kind of thinking is 
confounding to scientific thought where the effort is always to fix everything to a given identity and a given 
set of behaviors. 

Now, the other hermetic perception that is well illustrated by just thinking for a moment about mercury is 
the notion, and this is central to all hermetic thinking, of the microcosm and the macrocosm. That somehow 
the great world, the whole of the cosmos is reflected in the mystery of man, meaning men and women, it's 
reflected in the mystery of the, human mind/ body interface. So, for an alchemist, it makes perfect sense to 
extrapolate from this internal, what we, call internal psychological processes, to external processes in the 
world. That distinction doesn't exist for the alchemist, and let me, tell you, the, longer I live the more I am 
convinced that this is absolutely the truth. 



' verins? Rene Descartes (1596-1650) distingushed res cogitans (the mental) from res externa the physical. 



3 of 34 



pages 



